feat: add 0005 impersonation (#8)
logto-io/rfcs: draft/0005-impersonation.md

Reviewer: it will be better to add the following sections later:

- Drawbacks
- Rationale and alternatives
- Future possibilities

Author: Updated

---
Start date: 2024-05-30
Author(s): wangsijie
Revision: 1
---

# Impersonation

## Overview

User impersonation is a feature that allows an authorized user to assume the identity of another user within the system. This capability can be useful for various reasons such as troubleshooting, providing support, and performing administrative tasks. This document aims to explore the design and implementation of user impersonation in Logto.

## Motivation

> Logto is an enterprise ready identity provider, and it is essential to provide user impersonation capabilities to support various use cases. For example, a support engineer may need to troubleshoot an issue on behalf of a user, or an administrator may need to verify the permissions of a user. User impersonation can help to streamline these processes and improve the overall user experience.

Reviewer: less GPT-ish

```suggestion
As an enterprise-ready identity provider, it is essential to provide user impersonation capabilities to support various use cases. For example, a support engineer may need to troubleshoot an issue on behalf of a user, or an administrator may need to verify the permissions of a user. User impersonation can be helpful to these processes and improve the overall user experience.
```

> ## Token exchange

Reviewer: before this section, it'll be great to have an overview for the impersonation flow (calling management api, token exchange, and use the exchanged token), e.g. some introduction with a [sequence diagram](https://mermaid.js.org/syntax/sequenceDiagram.html)

Author: A sequence diagram figure is added in the beginning of "Example" section.

It is common to put the example section in the end for RFC.

The user impersonation feature will be implemented using the OAuth 2.0 [token exchange flow](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8693.html). The token exchange flow allows an authorized user to exchange their access token for a new access token that represents the identity of another user. The new access token can then be used to make API requests on behalf of the impersonated user.

> ### Request

Reviewer 2: how about an actor token?  So the actor claim can present in the returned impersonate access_token

Author: Updated

4. `subject_token`: REQUIRED. A security token that represents the identity of the party on behalf of whom the request is being made. See the next section for more details.
5. `subject_token_type`: REQUIRED. The type of the security token provided in the `subject_token` parameter. The value of this parameter must be `urn:ietf:params:oauth:token-type:access_token`.

### Response

If the token exchange request is successful, the tenant's token endpoint returns an access token that represents the identity of the impersonated user. The response includes the following parameters in the HTTP response entity-body using the `application/json` format.

1. `access_token`: REQUIRED. The access token that represents the identity of the impersonated user.
2. `issued_token_type`: REQUIRED. The type of the issued token. The value of this parameter must be `urn:ietf:params:oauth:token-type:access_token`.
3. `token_type`: REQUIRED. The type of the token. The value of this parameter must be `Bearer`.
4. `expires_in`: REQUIRED. The lifetime in seconds of the access token.
5. `scope`: OPTIONAL. The scopes of the access token.

> 6. `refresh_token`: OPTIONAL. The refresh token that can be used to obtain a new access token.

Reviewer: is it needed to use `refresh_token` grant for upcoming token exchanges? if so, better to specify

Author: Updated

### Example token exchange

> The following example demonstrates a token exchange request and response. An authorized user is exchanging the subject token for a new access token that represents the identity of another user.

Reviewer: better to add a sentence for introducing the example:

```suggestion
The following example demonstrates a token exchange request and response. An authorized user is exchanging the subject token for a new access token that represents the identity of another user.  Here's a non-normative example of the token exchange request:
```

```
POST /oidc/token HTTP/1.1
Host: example.logto.app
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

grant_type=urn%3Aietf%3Aparams%3Aoauth%3Agrant-type%3Atoken-exchange
&scope=openid%20offline_access%20profile
&subject_token=accVkjcJyb4BWCxGsndESCJQbdFMogUC5PbRDqceLTC
&subject_token_type=
urn%3Aietf%3Aparams%3Aoauth%3Atoken-type%3Aaccess_token
```

> Logto validates the `subject_token` and other parameters in the token exchange request. If the request is valid, Logto generates a new access token that represents the identity of the impersonated user and returns it in the response.

Reviewer: ditto for example introduction sentence

}
```

The payload of the access token:

```json
{
  "sub": "123",
  "scope": "openid offline_access profile",
  "client_id": "client1",
  "name": "John Doe",
  "iat": 1516239022,
  "act": {
    "sub": "456"
  }
}
```

## Subject token

The `subject_token` parameter in the token exchange request represents the identity of the party on behalf of whom the request is being made. The `subject_token` is a special one-time access token that is issued to the authorized user by Logto's management API. The `subject_token` is an opaque token that is not intended to be used directly by the client application. Instead, the client application exchanges the `subject_token` for a new access token that represents the identity of the impersonated user. Because the `subject_token` is only consumed by Logto as the authorization server, it does not need to be a JWT.

### Issuing a subject token

#### Request

The client makes a request to the tenant's management API to issue a subject token. The following parameters are included in the HTTP request entity-body using the `application/json` format.

1. `userId`: REQUIRED. The ID of the user on behalf of whom the request is being made.

> 2. `expiresIn`: OPTIONAL. The lifetime in seconds of the subject token. The default value is 600 seconds.

Reviewer: should we specify a range  for this? or we can leave it fixed to 600s in the first version

Author: updated, removed this param.

#### Response

If the request to issue a subject token is successful, the tenant's management API returns the subject token in the response.

1. `subject_token`: REQUIRED. The subject token that represents the identity of the user.

> 2. `expires_in`: REQUIRED. The lifetime in seconds of the subject token.

Reviewer: camelCase can be used since it's a Management API response

Reviewer: @wangsijie this is not resolved?

#### Example subject token issuance

The following example demonstrates a request to issue a subject token and the response. This request is made by a machine-to-machine application that has the necessary permissions to issue subject tokens.

```

> POST /api/subject-tokens HTTP/1.1

Reviewer 2: nit: we could align a subpath for such token or security related endpoints. e.g. incase we gonna have api key, and PAT endpoints later.

Author: Add a prefix `security/`

Host: example.logto.app
Authorization: Bearer eyJhbGciOiJSUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9...
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "userId":"123456",
  "expiresIn":600
}
```

Logto validates the `userId` and permissions to issue a subject token. If the request is valid, Logto generates a new subject token that represents the identity of the user and returns it in the response.

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "subject_token":"accVkjcJyb4BWCxGsndESCJQbdFMogUC5PbRDqceLTC",
  "expires_in":600
}
```

## Additional claims in the access token

### `act`

When a user impersonates another user, the access token issued by Logto contains an additional `act` claim that represents the identity of the impersonated user. The `act` claim is an object that contains the following fields.

1. `sub`: REQUIRED. The identity of the acting user. Typically, this will be the party that is authorized to use the requested security token and act on behalf of the subject.

This is an example JWT access token with the `act` claim.

```json
{
  "aud": "https://resource.example.com",
  "iss": "https://example.logto.app",
  "exp": 1443904177,
  "sub": "user2",
  "act": {

>     "sub": "user1"

Reviewer: 1. if this is required, where does it come from? i assume there should be a field to fill when requesting Management API for the subject token
2. can the sub be an app?

Author: Add a param `actorId` to the request

Reviewer: didn't see it though

Reviewer: it's ok i saw the update

### Issuing a subject token

#### Request

The client makes a request to the tenant's management API to issue a subject token. The following parameters are included in the HTTP request entity-body using the `application/json` format.

1. `userId`: REQUIRED. The ID of the user on behalf of whom the request is being made.

#### Response

If the request to issue a subject token is successful, the tenant's management API returns the subject token in the response.

1. `subject_token`: REQUIRED. The subject token that represents the identity of the user.
2. `expires_in`: REQUIRED. The lifetime in seconds of the subject token.

#### Example subject token issuance

The following example demonstrates a request to issue a subject token and the response. This request is made by a machine-to-machine application that has the necessary permissions to issue subject tokens.

```
POST /api/security/subject-tokens HTTP/1.1
Host: example.logto.app
Authorization: Bearer eyJhbGciOiJSUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9...
Content-Type: application/json

{

>   "userId":"123456",
>   "expiresIn":600

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "userId": "123456",
  "expiresIn": 600
```

}
```

Logto validates the `userId` and permissions to issue a subject token. If the request is valid, Logto generates a new subject token that represents the identity of the user and returns it in the response. Here is an example of the response:

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json

{

>   "subjectToken":"accVkjcJyb4BWCxGsndESCJQbdFMogUC5PbRDqceLTC",
>   "expiresIn":600

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "subjectToken": "accVkjcJyb4BWCxGsndESCJQbdFMogUC5PbRDqceLTC",
  "expiresIn": 600
```

}
```

## Additional claims in the access token

### `act`

> When `actor_token` presents in the request of token exchange, the access token issued by Logto will contain an additional `act` claim that represents the identity of the impersonated user. The `act` claim is an object that contains the following fields.

Reviewer: 1. how to get an `actor_token`?
2. for security reasons, should we mark this as required? (not sure)

Author: 1. The requirement of `actor_token` is added in the "Request" section. This is actully the access token of the support engineer (in this example).
2. According to the RFC, this is not required.

1. `sub`: REQUIRED. The identity of the acting user. Typically, this will be the party that is authorized to use the requested security token and act on behalf of the subject.

This is an example JWT access token with the `act` claim.

```json
{
  "aud": "https://resource.example.com",
  "iss": "https://example.logto.app",
  "exp": 1443904177,
  "sub": "user2",
  "act": {
    "sub": "user1"
  }
}
```

> The `act` claim is used to indicate that user1 is acting on behalf of user2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `act` claim is used to indicate that `user1` is acting on behalf of `user2`.
```

### `client_id`

> A JWT access token in Logto contains a `client_id` claim that represents the client application that requested the token. When a subject token is issued, the `client_id` claim in the subject token is set to the `client_id` of the machine-to-machine application that requested the subject token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The exchanged access token will contain a `client_id` claim that represents the client application that requested the token. When a subject token is issued, the `client_id` claim in the subject token is set to the `client_id` of the machine-to-machine application that requested the subject token.
```

## Example

The following example demonstrates how a support engineer can use the user impersonation feature to troubleshoot an issue on behalf of a user. Let's say the support engineer received a report from a user that they are unable to access a specific resource. The support engineer needs to investigate the issue and verify the user's permissions.

The following sequence diagram illustrates the flow of the user impersonation feature in Logto.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram

>     participant SE as Support Engineer
>     participant RO as Resource Owner API
>     participant M2M as Logto Management API
>     participant TS as Tenant's Token Endpoint
>     participant RS as Resource

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    participant SE as Support engineer
    participant RO as Resource owner API
    participant M2M as Logto Management API
    participant TS as Tenant's token endpoint
    participant RS as Resource
```

>     SE ->> RO: Request for subject token
>     RO ->> RO: validate user permission
>     RO ->> M2M: Request for subject token
>     M2M ->> RO: subject token
>     RO ->> SE: subject token
>     
>     SE ->> TS: POST /oidc/token to grant
>     TS ->> SE: access_token (along with other params)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    SE ->> RO: Request for subject token
    RO ->> RO: Validate user permission
    RO ->> M2M: Request for subject token
    M2M ->> RO: Issue subject token
    RO ->> SE: Return subject token
    
    SE ->> TS: Request token endpoint with token exchange grant
    TS ->> SE: Issue access token
```

    
    SE ->> RS: Fetch user resource with the access token
    RS ->> SE: Return data
```

### Step 1: Issue a subject token

> The support engineer calls the resource owner's API to issue a subject token for the user who reported the issue. The following request is a simple example of the resource owner's API, the resource owner MUST implement the necessary security controls to validate the support engineer's request according to their business requirements.

Reviewer: better to add something like "Assume the API is `POST /request-for-subject-token`, which requires ..."

```
POST /request-for-subject-token HTTP/1.1
Host: resource.example.com
Authorization: Bearer ...
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "userId":"123456",
  "ticketId":"7890"
}
```

> The resource owner API validates the support engineer's request and call Logto's management API using a machine-to-machine application to issue a subject token for the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The resource owner API validates the support engineer's request and call Logto's Management API using a machine-to-machine application to issue a subject token for the user:
```

```
POST /api/security/subject-tokens HTTP/1.1
Host: example.logto.app
Authorization: Bearer eyJhbGciOiJSUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9...
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "userId":"123456",
  "expiresIn":600
}
```

> Logto validates the request and issues a subject token for the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Logto validates the request and issues a subject token for the machine-to-machine application:
```

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "subjectToken":"accVkjcJyb4BWCxGsndESCJQbdFMogUC5PbRDqceLTC",
  "expiresIn":600
}
```

The resource owner API returns the subject token to the support engineer.

### Step 2: Exchange the subject token for an access token

> The support engineer exchanges the subject token for an access token that represents the identity of the user. The support engineer can use the access token to make API requests on behalf of the user.

Reviewer: since there's no access token yet:

```suggestion
The support engineer exchanges the subject token for an access token that represents the identity of the user:
```

```
POST /oidc/token HTTP/1.1
Host: example.logto.app
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

> grant_type=urn%3Aietf%3Aparams%3Aoauth%3Agrant-type%3Atoken-exchange

Reviewer: should we add the "resource" parameter here?

Author: I don't think we should, because this is a simple example, no need to include all of the parameters.

&scope=openid%20offline_access%20profile
&subject_token=accVkjcJyb4BWCxGsndESCJQbdFMogUC5PbRDqceLTC
&subject_token_type=
  urn%3Aietf%3Aparams%3Aoauth%3Atoken-type%3Aaccess_token
```

> Logto validates the subject token and other parameters in the token exchange request. If the request is valid, Logto generates a new access token that represents the identity of the user and returns it in the response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Logto validates the subject token and other parameters in the token exchange request. If the request is valid, Logto issues a new access token that represents the identity of the user and returns it in the response.
```

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
Cache-Control: no-cache, no-store

{
  "access_token":"eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJzd
    WIiOiIxMjMiLCJzY29wZSI6Im9wZW5pZCBvZmZsaW5lX2FjY2VzcyBwc
    m9maWxlIiwibmFtZSI6IkpvaG4gRG9lIiwiaWF0IjoxNTE2MjM5MDIyL
    CJhY3QiOnsic3ViIjoiNDU2In19.H-X4W0mu-lJae27_rvsHAx5LpzsH
    TDYozkWDWzBrMoM",
  "scope":"openid offline_access profile",
  "issued_token_type":
    "urn:ietf:params:oauth:token-type:access_token",
  "token_type":"Bearer",
  "expires_in":3600
}
```

The support engineer receives the access token and can now make API requests on behalf of the user.

### Step 3: Investigate the issue

> The support engineer uses the access token to make API requests to investigate the issue reported by the user. The support engineer can verify the user's permissions, troubleshoot the problem, and provide assistance to the user.

Reviewer: do we support organization token in this version?

Author: Yes, the token exchange flow will follow the same implementation of the normal flow.

## Token exchange

The user impersonation feature will be implemented using the OAuth 2.0 [token exchange flow](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8693.html). The token exchange flow allows an authorized user to exchange their access token for a new access token that represents the identity of another user. The new access token can then be used to make API requests on behalf of the impersonated user.

### Request

The client makes a token exchange request to the tenant's token endpoint with a special grant type using the HTTP POST method. The following parameters are included in the HTTP request entity-body using the `application/x-www-form-urlencoded` format.

1. `grant_type`: REQUIRED. The value of this parameter must be `urn:ietf:params:oauth:grant-type:token-exchange` indicates that a token exchange is being performed.

> 2. `resource`: OPTIONAL. The resource indicator, the same as other token requests.

Reviewer 2: Are we going to support organization scopes as well?

Author: Yes

3. `scope`: OPTIONAL. The requested scopes, the same as other token requests.
4. `subject_token`: REQUIRED. A security token that represents the identity of the party on behalf of whom the request is being made. See the next section for more details.

> 5. `subject_token_type`: REQUIRED. The type of the security token provided in the `subject_token` parameter. The value of this parameter must be `urn:ietf:params:oauth:token-type:access_token`.

Reviewer 2: Actually, I have an open question.  Since we are going to generate the subject_token by ourselves (not through OIDC-provider), what would be the exact definition for the type `urn:ietf:params:oauth:token-type:access_token`?
When can we state a token as an access_token and when cannot?

Reviewer: i thought about this and figured it could be left to the developer's discretion. let the business decide.

it'll be great to specify this though.

  "scope": "openid offline_access profile",
  "issued_token_type": "urn:ietf:params:oauth:token-type:access_token",
  "token_type": "Bearer",
  "expires_in": 3600
}
```

The payload of the access token:

```json
{
  "sub": "123",
  "scope": "openid offline_access profile",
  "client_id": "client1",
  "name": "John Doe",
  "iat": 1516239022
}
```

## Subject token

The `subject_token` parameter in the token exchange request represents the identity of the party on behalf of whom the request is being made. The `subject_token` is a special one-time access token that is issued to the authorized user by Logto's management API. The `subject_token` is an opaque token that is not intended to be used directly by the client application. Instead, the client application exchanges the `subject_token` for a new access token that represents the identity of the impersonated user. Because the `subject_token` is only consumed by Logto as the authorization server, it does not need to be a JWT.

### Issuing a subject token

#### Request

> The client makes a request to the tenant's management API to issue a subject token. The following parameters are included in the HTTP request entity-body using the `application/json` format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The client makes a request to the tenant's Management API to issue a subject token. The following parameters are included in the HTTP request entity-body using the `application/json` format.
```

> 1. `userId`: REQUIRED. The ID of the user on behalf of whom the request is being made.

Reviewer: i'm thinking about if this is required. as we'll record the m2m app that requested the management api, it looks not required to specify a user id. i'm open to both since we can mark it optional later.

Author: This is required, otherwise, we are unable to identify the "subject" in token exchange.

Reviewer: the subject can actually be a machine-to-machine app?

Author: No, we only support "user" here, it makes no sense to impersonate a machine to machine app, because it does not need UI to sign in.

2. `context`: OPTIONAL. Additional context information that may be used in "[Custom JWT claims](https://docs.logto.io/docs/recipes/custom-jwt/)". The context is an object that contains key-value pairs of additional claims.

#### Response

> If the request to issue a subject token is successful, the tenant's management API returns the subject token in the response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the request to issue a subject token is successful, the tenant's Management API returns the subject token in the response.
```

&subject_token_type=
  urn%3Aietf%3Aparams%3Aoauth%3Atoken-type%3Aaccess_token
```

Logto validates the subject token and other parameters in the token exchange request. If the request is valid, Logto issues a new access token that represents the identity of the user and returns it in the response.

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
Cache-Control: no-cache, no-store

{
  "access_token": "eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJzdWIiOiIxMjMiLCJzY29wZSI6Im9wZW5pZCBvZmZsaW5lX2FjY2VzcyBwcm9maWxlIiwibmFtZSI6IkpvaG4gRG9lIiwiaWF0IjoxNTE2MjM5MDIyLCJhY3QiOnsic3ViIjoiNDU2In19.H-X4W0mu-lJae27_rvsHAx5LpzsHTDYozkWDWzBrMoM",
  "scope": "openid offline_access profile",
  "issued_token_type": "urn:ietf:params:oauth:token-type:access_token",
  "token_type": "Bearer",
  "expires_in": 3600
}
```

The support engineer receives the access token and can now make API requests on behalf of the user.

### Step 3: Investigate the issue

The support engineer uses the access token to make API requests to investigate the issue reported by the user. The support engineer can verify the user's permissions, troubleshoot the problem, and provide assistance to the user.

> ## Appendix B. "context" In subject token

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Appendix B. Subject token context
```
